---
layout: page
title: Courses
permalink: courses
---


## Course Sequencing
* Flow Chart of Computer Science Courses for 2018-19
* [Flow Chart of Computer Science Courses for 2017-18](../docs/FlowCS1718.pdf)

## Placement Test Info
TJ offers a placement test each year for students who wish to place out of Foundations of Computer Science (the required 1st year course) and move directly into the AP Comptuer Science A w/ Data Structures course.  More information forthcoming.  

## Course Descriptions
**[Foundations of Computer Science](https://academics.tjhsst.edu/compsci/CSweb/index.html)**<br>
> This course is a standard 2nd semester college level course on algorithims and data structures in an object-oriented environment. The sorting algorithims studied include selection, insertion, merge, quick, and heap. The data structures studied include arrays, array lists, linked lists, stacks, queues, trees, sets, maps, and graphs. Additional topics include recursion, the Java Collections framework, Big-O analysis, and class design. The programming language is Java. Students taking this course should be independent thinkers able to spend a significant amount of time at a computer outside of class. Approximately 75% of the time is spent learning material that is above and beyond the material on the AP Computer Science A exam.  Prerequisite:  None

**Foundations of Computer Science Accelerated**<br>
> Accelerated Foundations of Computer Science is offered as differentiated instruction at Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology. It is meant to be an introductory computer science course for students who know some computer science but not enough to pass the Placement Test into APCS-A plus Data Structures. The course is noted by its instruction in both Python and Java computer languages, and its pace of instruction. It will cover more material at a faster pace than Foundations of Computer Science. In addition, it will cover a number of non-programming computer science topics. It will prepare students to take the second year course, APCS-A plus Data Structures.  Prerequisite:  None

**AP Computer Science A with Data Structures**<br>
> This course is a standard 2nd semester college level course on algorithims and data structures in an object-oriented environment. The sorting algorithims studied include selection, insertion, merge, quick, and heap. The data structures studied include arrays, array lists, linked lists, stacks, queues, trees, sets, maps, and graphs. Additional topics include recursion, the Java Collections framework, Big-O analysis, and class design. The programming language is Java. Students taking this course should be independent thinkers able to spend a significant amount of time at a computer outside of class. Approximately 75% of the time is spent learning material that is above and beyond the material on the AP Computer Science A exam.  Prerequisite:  Foundations of Computer Science

**Artificial Intelligence 1**<br>
>  Students study AI techniques in a variety of contexts with an emphasis on generalizing search algorithms. Topics include graphs, heuristics, recursion, pruning, constraint solvers and games. Programming assignments include word ladders, navigating across Romania, map coloring, Sudoku, GHOST and Reversi. The programming language is Python.  Prerequisite:  AP Computer Science A with Data Structures

**Artificial Intelligence 2**<br>
> Students study AI techniques in a variety of contexts with an emphasis on knowledge representation. Topics include natural language processing, optimization and learning. Programming assignments include a semantic lexicon for English, N-queens and other local search, Tic-Tac-Toe and neural networks. The programming language is Python.  Prerequisite:  Artificial Intelligence 1

**Computer Vision 1**<br>
> Students study the foundations of Computer Vision as well as open problems in the field. Topics include image filtering; boundary detection and object segmentation, recognition and detection; motion estimation and structure from motion. Students use Matlab, Open CV and Point Cloud Libraries, and will have the opportunity to explore implementation of the algorithms on parallel architecture.  Prerequisite:  AP Computer Science A with Data Structures

**Computer Vision 2**<br>
> This course is a continuation of Computer Vision 1. Computer Vision algorithms are at the heart of self-driving cars, modern medical imaging devices for diagnosis of disease, asteroid detection mechanisms, robotics and myriad other applications. This course will introduce students to modern approaches based on Deep Learning Models and to open problems in the field and build on their knowledge from earlier computer science and mathematics coursework. Topics covered in the course include large neural networks trained with back propogation and their application to Computer Vision, as well as other advanced techniques.  Prerequisite:  Computer Vision 1

**Parallel Computing 1**<br>
> Students study parallel programming and visualization in a variety of contexts with an emphasis on industry-standard tools. Topics include Huffman compression, percolation, parameter search, Monte Carlo methods, fractal generation and cellular automata. Most problems are of the so-called embarrassingly parallel type. The programming language is C using both MPI and 2-D OpenGL.  Prerequisite:  AP Computer Science A with Data Structures

**Parallel Computing 2**<br>
> Students study parallel programming and visualization in a variety of contexts with an emphasis on underlying and experimental technologies. Topics include orbital mechanics and the N-Body problem, graphics rendering via ray tracing and relaxation methods toward a steady-state. The programming language is C using both MPI and 3-D OpenGL. Additional tools and environments include OpenMP, XMT, pthreads, sockets, and Nvidia's CUDA for GPGPU.  Prerequisite:  Parallel Computing 1

**Mobile Applications Development**<br>
> Students develop software solutions by building mobile apps, which may include smart phone (Android, ios, and/or windows), tablet, and/or embedded systems. Development consists of user-interface design, a software-based blend of human computer interaction and user-centered design, as well as formal methods of software engineering such as product life-cycle, collaborative organizational structures, and important benchmarks. Students work in teams and typical activities include both design reviews and code reviews. Specific platforms and emphasis will vary based on projects and industry trends, and accessibility, privacy, security, connectivity, and product audience.  Prerequisite:  AP Computer Science A with Data Structures
 
**Web Applications Development**<br>
> Students develop software solutions by building web apps. Technologies may include a back-end SQL database, web programming in PHP and/or JavaScript, and user-interface design for mobile displays: HTML elements, CSS, tables, the DOM, and cookies. Web server configuration, server-side cookies, Iframes, and sessions may also be covered, as well as page sequencing, including both theory and practice in web services. Development consists of the formal methods of software engineering such as product life-cycle and collaborative organizational structures. Students work in teams and typical activities include both design reviews and code reviews. Emphasis will vary based on projects and industry trends, and accessibility, privacy, security, connectivity, and product audience. Prerequisite:  AP Computer Science A with Data Structures

**Computer Systems Laboratory Senior Research**<br>
> The TJHSST Computer Systems Laboratory supports student research in theoretical and applied computer science and computational science. Projects fall within a broad spectrum of computer science areas spanning artificial intelligence and machine learning, computer vision, computer graphics, high performance computing, grid/distributed computing, computational science applications, agent based modeling of complex systems including social complexity, software design, and development of theoretical algorithms. Our Computer Systems Laboratory emphasizes a multilingual computer language community, featuring C and C++, Java, Python, Ruby, XML, PHP, Perl, MySQL, JavaScript, Tk, OpenGL, Fortran, Lisp, and MASON (Multi-Agent Simulator of Neighborhoods).  Prerequisite:  AP Computer Science A with Data Structures

**Mobile and Web Applications Development Laboratory Senior Research**<br>
> Senior research lab in Mobile and Web Application Development. Senior research students build mobile apps for smart phones, tablets, and/or embedded systems, and/or build web apps using a modular development model and considering interface, accessibility (e.g., native language support, assistive technology), human computer interaction, user-centered design, privacy, security, networking connectivity, and their product's target or presumed audience. Research projects follow all phases of the software development life-cycle: planning, requirements analysis, design, implementation, integration, testing, deployment, and maintenance.  Prerequisite:  AP Computer Science A with Data Structures

**Computer Systems Senior Mentorship**<br>
> The mentorship program is one of the options available for students to meet the senior science and technology research graduation requirement. The program provides opportunities for selected seniors to work with accomplished scientists, engineers, and other professionals in firms or laboratories across the greater Washington, D.C. area. The students must plan, implement, document, and present projects chosen in consultation with these mentors and which coincide with the TJHSST technology laboratories. Students who seek this mentorship option must first be selected for one of the research laboratories. They also complete a mentorship application that includes obtaining two teacher recommendations (at least one from a laboratory science or technology teacher; the other from a mathematics or computer science teacher) and write a project brief which outlines the type of research in which they are interested. If selected, a student is assigned a mentor in a specific field that relates to his/her chosen laboratory. Students are released for part of the school day to work 10-15 hours per week at their mentorship locations. Students receive one credit for 180 hours of mentorship in one semester and two credits for 360 hours in two semesters. TJHSST technology laboratory directors and the mentorship coordinator monitor the students in their fields of interest. Course requirements include a project proposal, weekly log, oral presentation, project summary, final paper, and poster display board.  Prerequisite:  AP Computer Science A with Data Structures

**Mobile and Web Applications Development Senior Mentorship**<br>
> The mentorship program is one of the options available for students to meet the senior science and technology research graduation requirement. The program provides opportunities for selected seniors to work with accomplished scientists, engineers, and other professionals in firms or laboratories across the greater Washington, D.C. area. The students must plan, implement, document, and present projects chosen in consultation with these mentors and which coincide with the TJHSST technology laboratories. Students who seek this mentorship option must first be selected for one of the research laboratories. They also complete a mentorship application that includes obtaining two teacher recommendations (at least one from a laboratory science or technology teacher; the other from a mathematics or computer science teacher) and write a project brief which outlines the type of research in which they are interested. If selected, a student is assigned a mentor in a specific field that relates to his/her chosen laboratory. Students are released for part of the school day to work 10-15 hours per week at their mentorship locations. Students receive one credit for 180 hours of mentorship in one semester and two credits for 360 hours in two semesters. TJHSST technology laboratory directors and the mentorship coordinator monitor the students in their fields of interest. Course requirements include a project proposal, weekly log, oral presentation, project summary, final paper, and poster display board.  Prerequisite:  AP Computer Science A with Data Structures
